DOC-749 Update Creating a Plugin page (#1847)
tinymce/tinymce-docs: advanced/creating-a-plugin.md

---
layout: default
title: Create a plugin for {{site.productname}}
title_nav: Create a plugin
description_short: Introducing plugin creation, with an example.
description: A short introduction to creating plugins for {{site.productname}} along with an example plugin.
keywords: plugin plugin.js plugin.min.js tinymce.js
---

{{site.productname}} is designed to be easily extended by custom plugins.

## Requirements 

> To be recognised as a plugin by {{site.productname}}, the code for your custom plugin must have a JavaScript file with a single entry point that registers the plugin with {{site.productname}} using the `PluginManager`. Any other code or resources can be in separate files and can be loaded in any standard manner. {{site.productname}} also has various APIs for loading [scripts]({{ site.baseurl }}/api/tinymce.dom/tinymce.dom.scriptloader/) and [stylesheets]({{ site.baseurl }}/api/tinymce.dom/tinymce.dom).stylesheetloader/).

Reviewer: Unsure on this, what do you think
```suggestion
To be recognised as a plugin by {{site.productname}}, the code for your custom plugin must have a JavaScript file with a single entry point that registers the plugin with {{site.productname}} using the `PluginManager` API. Any other code or resources can be in separate files and can be loaded in any standard manner. {{site.productname}} also has various APIs for loading [scripts]({{ site.baseurl }}/api/tinymce.dom/tinymce.dom.scriptloader/) and [stylesheets]({{ site.baseurl }}/api/tinymce.dom/tinymce.dom).stylesheetloader/).
```

{{site.productname}} does not require any special file structure or tooling apart from these requirements, so custom plugins can be developed using most frameworks and tools. 

### Yeoman Generator

> {{site.companyname}} maintains a [Yeoman generator]({{ site.baseurl }}/advanced/yeoman-generator/) to help make plugin creation for {{site.productname}} easier. The Yeoman Generator will create the files and boilerplate code required for a custom plugin, and sets up some helpful commands. 

Reviewer 2: Thoughts?

```suggestion
{{site.companyname}} maintains a [Yeoman generator]({{ site.baseurl }}/advanced/yeoman-generator/) to assist with creating plugins for {{site.productname}}. The Yeoman Generator will create the files and boilerplate code required for a custom plugin, and sets up some helpful commands. 
```

## Registering a custom plugin with {{site.productname}}

> Register a custom plugin with {{site.productname}} using the PluginManager. `PluginManager.add()` takes a string for the plugin identifier and a function that contains the code for initializing the plugin. Optionally return an object containing a function that returns metadata which will be used in the list of plugins in the [Help plugin]({{ site.baseurl }}/plugins/opensource/help) dialog.

Reviewer 2: Finding this part a bit hard to read

```
Optionally return an object containing a function that returns metadata which will be used in the list of plugins in the [Help plugin]({{ site.baseurl }}/plugins/opensource/help) dialog.
```

Author: Hm. I could just move this down to where I detail the metadata object...

Reviewer 3: Yep. You're right. It should be with the metadata stuff

> The plugin identifier passed to `PluginManager.add()` is used by {{site.productname}} as an identifier string. It should be alphanumeric and can not contain spaces. Plugin identifiers should be unique. If multiple plugins have the same identifier, one will override the others. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The plugin identifier passed to `PluginManager.add()` is used by {{site.productname}} as an identifier string. It should be alphanumeric and cannot contain spaces. Plugin identifiers should be unique. If multiple plugins have the same identifier, one will override the others. 
```

Author: Not sure which we prefer tbh. @tylerkelly13 ?

> The metadata object can contain the following values:

Author: ```suggestion
Optionally, the function passed to `PluginManager.add()` can return an object that contains data that {{ site.productname }} or other plugins can use. {{ site.companyname }} recommend including a `getMetadata` callback that returns an object containing data that can be used to populate the list of plugins in the [Help plugin]({{ site.baseurl }}/plugins/opensource/help) dialog. The metadata object should contain the following values:
```
Maybe this @JamesToohey ?

Author: @tylerkelly13 FYI. I realised this object (the one that's returned, not the metadata one) can contain whatever methods - that's how we do plugin APIs. Hence kind of implying that here. `contains data` should maybe be `contains functions` or `contains callbacks`, not sure. Can show you an example from our plugins if that might help.

Author: ...Theoretically the metadata object can contain more data too, those two fields are just the ones the Help plugin uses...

Reviewer 3: > {{ site.companyname }} recommend including
s/recommend/recommends/
Otherwise, LGTM

- `name`: A string that contains the plugin's name, usually in a human-readable format.
- `url`: A string that contains a URL, usually used to link to help documentation. 

### Example: Plugin registration boilerplate

```js
tinymce.PluginManager.add('pluginId', function(editor, url) {
  // add plugin code here

  return {
    getMetadata: function () {
      return {
        name: 'Custom plugin',
        url: 'https://example.com/docs/customplugin'
      };
    }
  }
});
```

## Using custom plugins with {{site.productname}}

Custom plugins can be used by a {{site.productname}} instance by either:

- **Using `external_plugins`**: Use the [external_plugins option]({{ site.baseurl }}/configure/integration-and-setup/#external_plugins) to specify the URL based location of the entry point file for the plugin.
- **Copy code into `plugins` folder**: Copy the entry point file (and any other files) into the `plugins` folder of the distributed {{site.productname}} code.

> The plugin can then be used by including it in the list of plugins specified by the [`plugins` option]({{ site.baseurl }}/configure/integration-and-setup/#plugins).

Reviewer 3: should this be a part of the point above, or is the example for `external_plugins` wrong (empty `plugins` list)?

Author: Ah, yes, should be moved up. Thanks!

> - **Copy code into `plugins` folder**: Copy the entry point file (and any other files) into the `plugins` folder of the distributed {{site.productname}} code.
> 
> The plugin can then be used by including it in the list of plugins specified by the [`plugins` option]({{ site.baseurl }}/configure/integration-and-setup/#plugins).

Author: ```suggestion
- **Copy code into `plugins` folder**: Copy the entry point file (and any other files) into the `plugins` folder of the distributed {{site.productname}} code. The plugin can then be used by including it in the list of plugins specified by the [`plugins` option]({{ site.baseurl }}/configure/integration-and-setup/#plugins).
```

> **Note:** {{ site.companyname }} recommends using the `external_plugins` option for custom plugins.

### Example: Using `external_plugins`

```js
tinymce.init({
  selector: 'textarea',  // change this value according to your HTML
  external_plugins: {
    pluginId: 'https://example.com/customplugincode.min.js'
  },
  plugins: ''
});
```

### Example: Copying plugin code into the `plugins` folder

```js
tinymce.init({
  selector: 'textarea',  // change this value according to your HTML
  plugins: 'pluginId'
});
```

## Testing {{site.productname}}

> Due to the amount of browser APIs used by {{site.productname}}, when testing {{site.productname}} or any custom plugins, you must use a testing framework that runs on a real browser. Testing frameworks that mock the browser will not work. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Due to the range of browser APIs used by {{site.productname}}; when testing {{site.productname}} or any custom plugins, you must use a testing framework that runs on a real browser. Testing frameworks that mock the browser will not work. 
```

## Language localization

> {{site.productname}} comes with translations for many languages. To add additional strings to a supported language for a custom plugin, use the following procedure.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{{site.productname}} comes with translations for many languages. To add additional strings to a supported language for a custom plugin, use the following procedure:
```

Author: Hm. @tylerkelly13 ?

Reviewer 3: I would use the colon personally.

> 1. Create a "langs" directory in the plugin directory for custom translations. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Create a "`langs`" directory in the custom plugin's root directory for custom translations. 
```

> 2. For each language that the plugin supports, create a translation file. The files should be JavaScript files and use the relevant language code as the file name. For example, {{site.productname}} will look for a Spanish translation file at `'<your plugin>/langs/es_ES.js'`, where `<your plugin>` is to the directory that contains the plugin's entry point file. For a list of supported languages, see: [Supported languages]({{ site.baseurl }}/configure/localization/#supportedlanguages).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. For each language that the plugin supports, create a translation file.

    The files should be JavaScript files and use the relevant language code as the file name. For example: {{site.productname}} will search for a Spanish translation file at `'<your plugin>/langs/es_ES.js'`, where `<your plugin>` is to the directory that contains the plugin's entry point file. For a list of supported languages, see: [Supported languages]({{ site.baseurl }}/configure/localization/#supportedlanguages).
    
```
look = personification, search, less so.
Also, the indentation _shouldn't_ break the numbering make the para a child of the above list item...

> 2. In each translation file, add translation strings by passing an object containing key-value pairs of source strings and translation strings to `tinymce.addI18n()`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. In each translation file, add translation strings by passing an object containing key-value pairs of source strings and translation strings to the [`tinymce.addI18n()` API]({{site.baseurl}}/api/tinymce/root_tinymce/#addi18n).
```

## Language localization

{{site.productname}} comes with translations for many languages. To add additional strings to a supported language for a custom plugin, use the following procedure:

1. Create a "`langs`" directory in the custom plugin's root directory for custom translations.
2. For each language that the plugin supports, create a translation file.

    The files should be JavaScript files and use the relevant language code as the file name. For example: {{site.productname}} will search for a Spanish translation file at `'<your plugin>/langs/es_ES.js'`, where `<your plugin>` is to the directory that contains the plugin's entry point file. For a list of supported languages, see: [Supported languages]({{ site.baseurl }}/configure/localization/#supportedlanguages).

2. In each translation file, add translation strings by passing an object containing key-value pairs of source strings and translation strings to the [`tinymce.addI18n()` API]({{site.baseurl}}/api/tinymce/root_tinymce/#addi18n).

> 3. In the plugin's entry point file, call `tinymce.PluginManager.requireLangPack()` and pass it the plugin identifier and a comma deliminated string of the language codes to load.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3. In the plugin's entry point file, call `tinymce.PluginManager.requireLangPack()` and pass it the plugin identifier and a comma delimitated string of the language codes to load.
```

keywords: plugin plugin.js plugin.min.js tinymce.js
---

{{site.productname}} is designed to be easily extended by custom plugins; with APIs for registering custom plugins, and creating and localizing custom UI.

## Requirements

> To be recognised as a plugin by {{site.productname}}, the code for your custom plugin must have a JavaScript file with a single entry point that registers the plugin with {{site.productname}} using the `PluginManager` API. Any other code or resources can be in separate files and can be loaded in any standard manner. {{site.productname}} also has various APIs for loading [scripts]({{ site.baseurl }}/api/tinymce.dom/tinymce.dom.scriptloader/) and [stylesheets]({{ site.baseurl }}/api/tinymce.dom/tinymce.dom.stylesheetloader/).

Author: Just realised there's a "your" in here...
```suggestion
To be recognised as a plugin by {{site.productname}}, the code for a custom plugin must have a JavaScript file with a single entry point that registers the plugin with {{site.productname}} using the `PluginManager` API. Any other code or resources can be in separate files and can be loaded in any standard manner. {{site.productname}} also has various APIs for loading [scripts]({{ site.baseurl }}/api/tinymce.dom/tinymce.dom.scriptloader/) and [stylesheets]({{ site.baseurl }}/api/tinymce.dom/tinymce.dom.stylesheetloader/).
```

Custom plugins can be added to a {{site.productname}} instance by either:

- **Using `external_plugins`**: Use the [`external_plugins` option]({{ site.baseurl }}/configure/integration-and-setup/#external_plugins) to specify the URL-based location of the entry point file for the plugin.
- **Copy code into `plugins` folder**: Copy the entry point file (and any other files) into the `plugins` folder of the distributed {{site.productname}} code. The plugin can then be used by including it in the list of plugins specified by the [`plugins` option]({{ site.baseurl }}/configure/integration-and-setup/#plugins).

> **Note:** {{ site.companyname }} recommends using the `external_plugins` option for custom plugins.

### Example: Using `external_plugins`

```js
tinymce.init({
  selector: 'textarea',  // change this value according to your HTML
  external_plugins: {
    pluginId: 'https://example.com/customplugincode.min.js'
  },
  plugins: ''
});
```

### Example: Copying plugin code into the `plugins` folder

```js
tinymce.init({
  selector: 'textarea',  // change this value according to your HTML
  plugins: 'pluginId'
});
```

## Testing {{site.productname}}

> Due to the range of browser APIs used by {{site.productname}}; when testing {{site.productname}} or any custom plugins, you must use a testing framework that runs on a real browser. Testing frameworks that mock the browser will not work.

Author: Another "you"?

Author: ```suggestion
Due to the range of browser APIs used by {{site.productname}}; when testing {{site.productname}} or any custom plugins, {{site.productname}} requires a testing framework that runs on a real browser. Testing frameworks that mock the browser will not work.
```
